JUDY WOODRUFF: As we reported
earlier, President Trump took
steps to roll back some parts of
the Obama administration's
opening to Cuba, which began
two-and-a-half years ago.
John Yang reports now on what's
out and what stays in effect.
JOHN YANG: President Trump
made the announcement
in Miami's Little Havana
before an enthusiastic
crowd in a packed auditorium.
DONALD TRUMP, President of
the United States: Effective
immediately, I am canceling the
last administration's completely
one-sided deal with Cuba.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: While the president's
action falls short of canceling,
he said it fulfills a
campaign promise to
undo President Obama's
re-engagement with Cuba.
BARACK OBAMA, Former President
of the United States: Today,
the United States of America
is changing its relationship
with the people of Cuba.
JOHN YANG: In December 2014, Mr.
Obama restored diplomatic ties
with the island nation, after
more than 50 years of hostility.
In March 2016, he became the
first U.S. president to visit
Cuba in nearly a century.
President Trump says his
focus is halting the flow of
U.S. dollars to the communist
government.
DONALD TRUMP: Our policy will
seek a much better deal for
the Cuban people and for the
United States of America.
We do not want U.S. dollars to
prop up a military monopoly that
exploits and abuses the citizens
of Cuba.
JOHN YANG: The new policy bans
transactions with enterprises,
including hotels and other
tourist-related businesses,
ultimately owned by
the Cuban military.
Mr. Trump is also reinstating
a rule that restricts
individual travel, and requires
most visits to Cuba to be
in group tours organized
by American companies.
But the policy continues
direct commercial flights
between the two countries.
The administration will also
maintain the U.S. Embassy
in Havana, but still with no
ambassador.
In Havana today, Cubans reacted.
MAN (through translator):
Trump's words simply
seem a bit ambiguous.
If the governments want the
best for both the Cuban and
American people, they have to
look out for the common things
that exist between the two.
WOMAN (through translator): If
definitely feels like a huge
setback in the relationship
between Cuba and
the United States.
We will see what happens, but,
right now, I think it's like
going back to the Cold War.
JOHN YANG: None of the
changes will take effect
until the U.S. Treasury
and Commerce Departments
issue new regulations,
which could take months.
For more on the revised policy,
and how it's being understood
in Cuba, we turn to Alan
Gomez of USA Today, who
joins us from Havana.
Alan, thanks for being with us.
We heard in the tape
piece a little smattering
of some reaction from
the streets of Havana,
but I know you have been
out reporting today.
What are you hearing
from average Cubans in
Havana about this change?
ALAN GOMEZ, USA Today: I mean,
it's been a level of confusion,
of sadness, of disgust,
of anger.
You know, just imagine.
These people have lived here for
decades without any interaction
with the United States, with
the U.S. just treating
them as an enemy and
closing off to them.
Then, two-and-a-half years
ago, they get this opening, and
they talk about this period,
already in the past tense, as
this glorious period where they
were able to have more Americans
down here, interact with them
more, and visit the U.S. more.
And now Trump has taken it
not all away, but has really
cut that back significantly.
So, yes, there's a lot of anger
here right now and a lot of
confusion over why it's being
done.
JOHN YANG: How have they
talked about how their lives
have changed, what difference
this past two years
has been to them?
ALAN GOMEZ: Well, understand,
Cuba, the state-run economy, you
only get a certain salary from
the government.
You only get certain
benefits from the government.
So what they rely on so heavily
across the board is tourism.
And what it's done is infused a
whole lot of Americans down here
over these past two-and-a-half
years.
So you think about everybody
from private restaurant owners,
to private taxies, to tour
guides, all these people that
interact with Americans, they're
all the ones that are getting
that benefit directly.
President Trump talked a lot
today about how all of the money
that's been going down over
these last couple of
years is going straight
to the Cuban government.
But I can tell you, from being
down here quite a bit over the
last couple of years and talking
to folks today, that
they are saying that,
no, they get a lot of it.
Yes, of course some of it goes
to the government, but they're
upset that, to punish the Cuban
government, they're the ones
that are getting hurt as well.
JOHN YANG: How
will they get hurt?
How will life change for them
under these changed rules?
ALAN GOMEZ: Well, it's
a combination of things.
It's, quite simply, fewer
American tourists are going to
be able to make the trip because
of the way that the Trump
administration is going
to change the visa system.
It is going to be a lot
harder for American tourists
now to get to the U.S.
Right now, if you're an
American and want to come down
to Cuba, hop online, you can
figure out your trip, and you
can pretty much get your visa
at the airport counter on your
way down here.
Now they are going to go back
to the old way, where you have
to apply beforehand to the
federal government, get
approval to go down.
And so the people down
here in Cuba are just
expecting that that torrent
of American visitors
is going to dry up.
And then there's another aspect.
There are just all these
private business owners that
have had a lot of interaction
in the last few years, going
to the United States, working
with U.S. businesspeople,
getting training in the
United States and bringing
those lessons back to Cuba.
And so they're worried that that
is going to be limited as well.
JOHN YANG: Alan, in the
less than a minute we
have left, I want to ask
you about a development
on your regular beat,
which is immigration.
The Trump administration
announced last night
that they were going to
keep the program that
protects from deportation
undocumented immigrants
who came as children.
The president during the
campaign said he was going do
away with that, he was going
to change that Obama policy.
What do you make of this,
deciding to keep this?
ALAN GOMEZ: What the
president did was pretty
much eliminate a program
that would have protected
their parents from deportation.
That program, there's
no immediate effect of
that, because all --
that program had been
on hold in the courts
for some time now.
But what it does is, it
means that those parents
are never going to get
any sort of legal status
under this president.
And, more than that, it means
that those children that have
been protected from deportation
under the Deferred Action for
Childhood Arrivals program, now
they are worried that they are
going to have that
taken away from them.
JOHN YANG: Although, in the
president's announcement,
or the administration
announcement last night,
they specifically said that
that program would remain,
would remain in place.
Alan Gomez of USA Today
from Havana, Cuba,
thanks for joining us.
ALAN GOMEZ: Thank you.